IPMT: IP measurement tools

$Id: README 119 2009-12-07 12:32:54Z heusse $

Network performance measurement tools at the transport level
-------------------------------------------------- ----------

IPMT is a set of tools to measure performance of networks
at the transport level  (TCP/IP and UDP/IP).

Udpmt are Tcpmt and client programs, respectively under TCP and UDP.
They provide every second a report of the obtained throughput, which
allows a continuous measurement, unlike tools like Netperf,
iperf or ttcp. They allow therefore not only an evaluation of the average throughput,
but also continuous monitoring of changes in the throughput in presence of
changing network conditions, such as intervention of
competing transmissions, or changes in the transmission conditions
(eg WLAN).

By default, they continuously transmit to the discard port of the recipient
machine. This means that under UDP, the flow measured at
the sender may not match the speed actually transmitted,
since UDP offers no delivery guarantee.

Udpmt and tcpmt open no TCP control connection, contrary to -
for example - Netperf. It therefore does not suffer from the problem of TCP connections
struggling to settle because of a UDP transmissions that started
earlier.

Tcptarget and udptarget are two programs which allow flow measurement
at the destination (the only reliable measure in the case of UDP).

Simplified use :
----------------

tcpmt [-p port] [-s pktsz] [-n pktnb] [-d secs] host
udpmt [-p port] [-s pktsz] [-n pktnb] [-d secs] host

Where:

- Port is the recipient port number (13000, by default).
- Pktsz is the size of packets issued (1472 bytes by default for UDP, 1460 for TCP)
- Pktnb is the number of packets to issue (by default, the program
   transmit until stopped by Control-C).
- Secs is the test time in seconds. If secs and pktnb are specified, the
   test stops when one of the two conditions is checked (number of
   packets reached, or duration reached).
- Host is the recipient.

The program makes every second a report displaying :

- The time of issue (in ms since 0h)
- The number of packets delivered during the interval,
- The total number of packets delivered,
- Throughput measured during the interval, in kbit / s
- The average over the last 10 seconds
- The average since the beginning.

Tcptarget and udptarget are two programs that allow measurement
flow at the destination.

tcptarget [-i ms] [-o filename] [-p port]
udptarget [-i ms] [-o filename] [-p port]

Where:

* Ms is the interval  display of flow in milliseconds. By default,
   the throughput is displayed every second.
* Filename is the name of the file where the trace of throughput is recorded.
   If no file name is specified, the throughput is displayed on the standard output.
   If a file name is specified, the track is recorded in
   this file, and the throughput is also displayed on standard output.
* Port is the port number on which the program starts listening. If
   none is specified, a port number is selected and displayed.

Once tcptarget / udptarget begin to receive packets, they
display the bitrate every second. This display is 
simpler as the display of the sender program (and therefore easier to exploit,
though less comprehensive), and includes time of receipt in seconds
(with 3 decimals, so a millisecond precision), and the bitrate in
kbit / s.

Using TCP / udptarget has a big advantage when you want to
measure the behavior of concurrent flows sent to the same
target machine: the moment of arrival is measured on the same machine,
the results can be matched without having to ensure
the proper synchronization of transmitting machines.

Advanced use of udpmt:
---------------

Udpmt has a number of additional options that allow
use it as a simple traffic generator :

* -i microsecs: miscrosecs is the interval, in microseconds, between
   transmissions (ie, bursts). By default, the interval is zero, meaning that
   transmission is continuous.
* -r rate: specification of th bitrate in Kilobit per second.
* -B burst specify a burst size burst in number of packets, ie
   that burst packets will be sent immediately without waiting. This
   option is obviously of interest only if -i or -r is specified.
   Default burst size is 1 packet. This can be used for non-saturating 
   measurements with -e option of udptarget.
* -b burst: As above, but the size of bursts is expressed in
   bytes. If the burst size is not a multiple of the packet
   size, transmission is done until the number of bytes
   transmitted is either higher or equal to the burst size. The possible surplus
   is deducted from the following burst. 
- -t interval: Specifies the value in microseconds of the interval between
   periodic interruptions used for scheduling transmissions. The
   default is 500 microseconds, which is below the
   granularity timer on most systems (usually between one and
   ten milliseconds). The actual value will be the maximum
   of the specified interval and the interval of the system timer (1 second / HZ).
- -T TOS: Specifies the value of Type of Service (ToS fields in the IP header).
   This value is used by networking equipment implementing quality of
   service.
  
Compilation:
-------------

In addition to Linux, the program has been successfully compiled
under Solaris, FreeBSD, MacOS X and Windows / Cygwin, but portability
is not routinely checked when changes are done. So, your mileage may vary...

The compilation and installation of IPMT is done the traditional way :

Unpack the tarball (tar vxfz ipmt-xxx.tgz),

(cd ipmt-xxx)
./configure
make
make install

Only the last command needs to be run as root.
